---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
feature-img: "/assets/img/whale-and-petunias.jpg"
---

# erfur?

Let's start with the obvious: The handle is erfur, the output of the algorithm
that assigned shortened names to students for email addresses at Istanbul
Technical University. I was never good at coming up with distinct names
(especially bad with names that end with "teknik"). This one sounded unique so I
went with it.

I've been in close contact with computers since before I started going to
school. However my relationship with computers never turned into technical
wizardry like programming or web design or security until late into my
university years. I was more into owning a computer than actually using it for
stuff. I followed hardware news closely and would dream of owning the latest
laptops, gpus and cpus. I could name every available cpu and gpu model that was
on sale at the time. When I got my hands on my first pc (a netbook), I spent
more time on eye candy themes than anything else. Things did not change much
after I got a gaming notebook, except for spending more time in games than
anything in life.

Not that I haven't had the curiosity, it's just that I never really got over my
procrastination to do something about it. Up until I realized that university
wasn't going to offer the knowledge I was looking for. The realization had me
start looking for entrypoints into the massive world of hacking. My search ended
after stumbling upon the book "Hacking: The Art of Exploitation". At that point
I'd had little experience with C and Python, but absolutely none with anything
hacking-related. The book is a hardcore entry into binary exploitation and
reverse engineering. It's a bit dated for this era but a definitive reference
for the roots of binary exploitation on linux. While it was hard, I went through
the book with an absolute determination and laid the very foundation of what I
know about computers today. My pursuit of getting to know how computers and
software work gained a huge momentum with the knowledge from that book.

After feeling my passion for binary exploitation and reverse engineering, I
started doing CTFs. It opened up a big sea of opportunities down the line,
however I must say that I never really figured out how to learn from CTFs or why
I shouldn't have spent a lot of my time doing CTFs until much later when it
became blatantly clear. My love-hate relationship with CTFs will probably be a
blog post later.

Years after, having been burnt out from failures and not getting anywhere
meaningful chased me away from many things, including my pursuit of hacking. In
the meantime I tried to reevaluate what it meant to be a hacker in a true sense.
The word *hacker* that meant "A person who enjoys exploring the details of
programmable systems and how to stretch their capabilities, as opposed to most
users, who prefer to learn only the minimum necessary." ([from the
jargon](http://catb.org/jargon/html/H/hacker.html)) started to have more meaning
than the word *hacker* that meant "A malicious meddler who tries to discover
sensitive information by poking around.". I'd never considered programming to be
cool on its own before I got to read some of the most used services' source
codes. The revelation that I had while reading source code was invaluable as an
experience. I truly realized that figuring out how to build programs and coding
them can be true art forms. The fact that I undervalued these and only focused
on the offensive techniques left me unable to improve my skills to any
meaningful degree.

Now, here I am, trying to reignite the passion. Hopefully this time the quest
lasts longer and I get to show my progress through this blog.
