---
title: From visual to practical
tags: ['workflow']
date: 2022-01-03
---

## Table of contents

<TOCInline toc={props.toc} exclude="Overview" toHeading={2} />

My journey with linux started around 2008 when I first got my hands on a Ubuntu
live cd that came with CHIP magazine. I was extremely curious of what it had to
offer as software but back then I lived in a dorm and I did not have a portable
computer. The dorm had a computer room with two computers on the ground floor.
Me and my friend used to leave the window open to sneak in at night (insert
mission impossible theme here). I would boot up the live cd and go through the
software center to explore the available programs while my friend would play WoW
on private servers.

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/hardy_heron.jpeg)
</div>

When I got my first laptop (An MSI Wind U100 netbook), it was around the time
Windows 7 was released to the public. It was such a fresh leap from XP and Vista
in terms of UI. The Aero effects were pleasant and vibrant. I used to set up
desktop widgets like CPU and RAM usage meters and the analog clock. I always
tried to set them up perfectly aligned.

<div className="-mx-2 flex flex-wrap overflow-hidden xl:-mx-2">
    <div className="my-1 w-full overflow-hidden px-2 xl:my-1 xl:w-1/2 xl:px-2">
        ![img](/static/images/visual/cpu-meter.jpg)
    </div>
    <div className="my-1 w-full overflow-hidden px-2 xl:my-1 xl:w-1/2 xl:px-2">
        ![img](/static/images/visual/clock-widget.jpg)
    </div>
</div>

My curiosity had no direction and I ended up obsessing over having a
good-looking desktop and cool effects, which were doable without dealing with
technical details. Meanwhile, I wanted to switch to linux and started looking
for the best distro to make the jump. After exploring different distros I
stumbled upon the "Ubuntu Ultimate Edition" by TheeMahn. The distro offered
pretty much everything in one package which got me hooked as a potential
hoarder. Also seeing the possibilities compiz brought blew my mind. I used that
distro for years.

<div className="-mx-2 flex flex-wrap overflow-hidden xl:-mx-2">
    <div className="my-1 w-full overflow-hidden px-2 xl:my-1 xl:w-1/2 xl:px-2">
        ![img](/static/images/visual/compiz.gif)
    </div>
    <div className="my-1 w-full overflow-hidden px-2 xl:my-1 xl:w-1/2 xl:px-2">
        ![img](/static/images/visual/compiz2.gif)
    </div>
</div>

After switching to linux permanently, as every other linux desktop user, I found
the functionality of widgets in conky. The extensibility of conky was both great
and a bit scary to me. Since I'd never dabbled in scripting before, I couldn't
really do anything with it. Instead, I used configurations others put on the
internet.

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/conky.png)
</div>

Around the time I was using Gnome 2.6 as my desktop environment. It coming as
the default DE with Ubuntu and the customization capabilities were convenient
enough that I did not really give much of a chance to other alternatives like
KDE or Enlightenment. Then Gnome 3 happened. When I tried it, the good feeling
of eyecandy quickly subsided with the lacking customizability. It did not feel
like linux to me, so I started looking for a new DE. 

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/gnome3.png)
</div>

The feeling about Gnome 3 turned out to be mutual, hence MATE desktop
environment was developed as a fork of Gnome 2.6. I kept MATE as my ain DE for a
long while.

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/mate.png)
</div>

My next stop on pretty and customizable DEs was KDE. KDE 4 was said to be
usually a buggy mess and when KDE 5 hit release candidates, It looked extremely
promising in terms of visuals. I remember changing the cursor theme to [Pulse
Glass][1] as the first thing after installing KDE.

[1]: https://store.kde.org/p/999994

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/plasma.png)
</div>

I tried KDE 5 and it pretty much clicked in every way. I kept it as my main DE
for a few years. Contrary to how it was perceived as buggy and unstable, I had
very few problems with it; even though I started using it in RC versions. The
application suite that came with KDE was also complete, deeply customizable and
slick. I was extremely satisfied with the whole package.

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/dolphin.jpeg)
</div>

Meanwhile, I was getting more and more into the poweruser territory. My workflow
started involving the terminal and dealing with networked applications and
systems. My requirements as a user shifted heavily towards portable and light
environments. I felt overwhelmed by the sheer amount of capabilities and
applications that were installed on my system that I rarely used. I wanted to
have a system that provided what is necessary. This would allow me to keep it
simple and keep my installation light and reproducible regardless of hardware.

My interest towards practicality resulted in the exploration of terminal
applications.  Bash, zsh, vim, tmux and many others followed while I was trying
to get comfortable with editing config files to set things up. At first I had a
hard time understanding all the different options so I went with available
frameworks like oh-my-zsh, spf13-vim and spacevim. These projects pack every extension
ever into one package and make it possible to install everything with one
command. At the time this seemed like the answer; However, as time passed I
realized that I made the same mistake as before. There were just too many
functions that I would never need. This also presented another problem: Since
everything came preconfigured, there were a ton of shortcuts to learn and
integrate into my workflow. The configuration files were humongous. In case any
problems occurred, I did not know where to debug. If I wanted to change a
shortcut, there was a good possibility of a collision.

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/spf13.png)
</div>

Even though I knew these problems were affecting my productivity and workflow
potential, I stuck with frameworks for a while. Only recently I said enough and
started getting rid of these overengineered extensions and writing
configurations from simple templates. After getting rid of the complexity and
focusing on what I absolutely need, I found the ultimate customizability (not in
visual but in practical sense) in these applications. With that, I was ready to
put the final nail in the coffin.

Finally, I made the switch from KDE to i3. With that, I felt that I officially
embraced the value of practicality. I felt that I was now using the computer as
a tool, not a scenery. Even though I was big on configuring the environment
prioritizing visuals for years, now a wallpaper didn't even seem necessary to
me. Of course I did set up a wallpaper, fonts and a colored bash prompt but
these came after functionality.

As I'm writing this post, I'm looking at a screen with very little clutter: i3wm
(without gaps), an (almost) uncustomized i3bar reporting system resources, an
Alacritty window and Vim with my selected plugins running on it. I love having
very few dependecies with my tools. I can have this setup on a very broad
spectrum of hardware without hiccups and my terminal and graphical environment
consists of broadly available tools so I can set them up on any remote or local
system I want. It's the freedom of not having to install a bunch of packages and
having to rely on esoteric or intricate software that makes me feel great and
productive. It's all set up the way that I can leverage. I honestly don't miss
having aesthetic interfaces at all.

<div>
![img](/static/images/visual/i3.png)
</div>

This post served as a retrospective on how I used my computer. I only wish that
I kept screenshots from my previous setups, all of the images except the last
are taken from google. Nevertheless, It felt nostalgic and fulfilling to see the
changes over the years. I'm also publishing this post as a welcome to 2022.

So, happy new year!
